CHAPTER V

snotmucss or musas

A SUBJECT of vital importance in the mastery of Subordi-
nate Clause Syntax is the Sequence of TenseS. The first
fact to be noted in a discussion of this subject is that
its laws apply* only to Subjunctive verbs in subordinate
clauses. This principle is due to the fact that the tenses
of the Subjunctive in subordinate clauses usually express
time relative to that of the verbs upon which they depend.
These Subjunctive tenses may expreSS, a) incomplete, or
contemporaneous action; b) future. or subsequent action ; ,
or c) completed, or past action, with reference to the time
of the main verb. ἦ

Tenses are either Primary or Secondary (Historical). ,
Primary tenses include all forms that relate to the Present
or Future ; Secondary, all that relate to the Past. A
Primary principal verb can be followed regularly only
by a Primary Subjunctive verb; a Secondary, by a Sec-
ondary Subjunctive verb. For example, fiebat in I, 2, 13,
being Secondary, is followed by vagarentur, a Secondary
Subjunctive verb. ,

The following table shows in all Moods the Primary and
Secondary tenses in both principal and subordinate clauseS.
The Caesar student should give attention chiefly to the
tenses in black type; others are largely for reference.

References: H. 544-50 (491—95);- A. 482—85 (285—87);
G. 509-19; B. 267-793 ΗΒ. 476-80.

40

