CHAPTER IV

CONDITIONAL SERTERCES

A CONDrrIONAL sentence consists of a principal clause
called the ApodosiS, and a subordinate clause called the
Protasis, Is lte learns (protasis), I shall be happy (apodo-
sis). For grammar references and information concerning
introductory conj unctionS, see 7, a, under adverbial clauseS‚
Chapter ΙΙ.

There are three kinds of conditional sentences: Real,
Ideal, and Unreal; or from another viewpoint‚ Present,

Past, and Future. Each. of these has two classes, Con-
ditional sentences a and b in the table on page 32 may

express general instead of particular ideas with no change ,
of form except as shown in H. 578, 2 (508, 5, 2); A. 518
(309) ; B. 302, 2, 33 ΗΒ. 576, a. They merely add, in
translating‚ ever in the Protasis and always in the ApodosiS,
thus stating general truthS, eg. ut, si illi premantur (pre-
muntur), expeditum ad suos receptum habeant (habent), so
tlzat {f they are ever hard pressed, they always have an easy
retreat to their own men, IV, 33, 7 (a present Real condition
expressing a general idea). The Protasls of a conditional
‘sentence expressing a general idea is frequently a Relative
clause introduced by an Indefinite Relative, or a Relative
having an antecedent like any one or every one, which in-
cludes all of a class of objects; eg. ut fortunam quaecumque
accidat experiantur, that they should test fortune whatever
(if anything) happens, Ι, 31, 60.

The table on page 32 gives the moodS. tenses, and English
translation regularly required in the various kinds of con-

30

 

